TTA-based Co-design Environment (TCE) v1.9 released
---------------------------------------------------

TTA-based Co-design Environment (TCE) is a toolset for designing 
application-specific processors based on the Transport Triggered 
Architecture (TTA). The toolset provides a complete retargetable co-design
flow from high-level language programs down to synthesizable processor
RTL (VHDL and Verilog backends supported) and parallel program binaries.
Processor customization points include the register files, function units, 
supported operations, and the interconnection network.

This release adds support for LLVM 3.4. OSAL operands now have
widths and element counts to support multiple size operations in
the same function unit among other things. Several bug fixes
are also included.

Note 1: LLVM 3.4 has some issues which affect its use in TCE. 
Patches for fixing these are shipped in the TCE build tree. See 
the INSTALL file for details on how to install LLVM with them 
applied correctly.

Note 2: Also this time we decided it is not useful to do a tar ball 
release. Users are directed to check out the release branch from the version 
control system. The branch might get fixes backported also after 
the release announcement.

Acknowledgements
----------------
Thanks to Blaine Rister for his first code contributions to TCE in this 
release. Keep them coming!

We'd like to thank the Radio Implementation Research Team of Nokia
Research Center, Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (project
"Parallel Acceleration", funding decision 40115/13) and the Academy of Finland 
(funding decision 253087) for financially supporting most of the development work 
in this release. Much appreciated!

Links
-----

TCE home page:     http://tce.cs.tut.fi
This announcement: http://tce.cs.tut.fi/downloads/ANNOUNCEMENT
Change log:        http://tce.cs.tut.fi/downloads/CHANGES
Install info:      http://tce.cs.tut.fi/downloads/INSTALL
Download:          run: "bzr co lp:tce/1.9 tce-1.9"
