TTA-Based Codesign Environment (TCE) v1.3 released
--------------------------------------------------

TTA-Based Codesign Environment (TCE) is a toolset for designing 
application-specific processors (ASP) based on the Transport Triggered 
Architecture (TTA). The toolset provides a complete retargetable codesign 
flow from C programs down to synthesizable VHDL and parallel program 
binaries. Processor customization points include the register files, 
function units, supported operations, and the interconnection network.

Notable new features
--------------------
- Support for LLVM 2.8 (support for LLVM 2.7 retained)
- ttasim: call info (setting profile_transfer_tracking) and the instruction
  profile (ttasim setting profile_data_saving) are now saved to separate
  pure text files to speed up simulation when these traces are enabled.
- ttasim: instruction profile can be converted to cachegrind-compatible 
  traces which can be visualized with kcachegrind.
- SystemC integration: Possibility to add TTA simulation models to system
  level simulations with the ability to override the operation pipeline 
  simulation models for the function units.
- Improved the scheduling for unconnected machines through temporary
  register copies based on the maze algorithm for ASIC place & route.
  Not restricted to maximum of two copies anymore.
- Basic support for debugging info when compiled with 'tcecc -g'. 
  The source code line numbers are displayed as comments in 'tcedisasm' 
  output and ttasim's disassembly.
- Platform Integration support is improved. New integrator components
  include AvalonIntegrator which can be used to integrate TTA to a
  Altera SOPC Builder component and KoskiIntegrator which can be used
  to integrate TTA processor to Koski toolset compatible IP blocks with
  IP-XACT 1.2 component description file.

Acknowledgements
----------------
Thanks to Fabio Garzia and Andy Lam who contributed their first patches
to this release!

Links
-----

TCE home page: http://tce.cs.tut.fi
Download:      http://tce.cs.tut.fi/downloads
Change log:    http://tce.cs.tut.fi/downloads/CHANGES

